okay I think we have like a couple of things on the agenda so
things on the agenda so
I think the first one was around
around please
please to kind of give a quick update of on
to kind of give a quick update of on where we are and then
where we are and then and then like we have a follow-up
and then like we have a follow-up
discussions on the archiving work that Garen has been working on
maybe I can start with yeah face given that this is like a quick thing
so yeah so like we have we started to kind of go back to the that fee
to kind of go back to the that fee cap that I was looking at the draft
cap that I was looking at the draft it was first put together end of June
it was first put together end of June last year so it has been sitting
last year so it has been sitting accumulating dust for a long time and
accumulating dust for a long time and yeah so we're actually like looking into
yeah so we're actually like looking into this again
this again we started a
we started a by doing a couple things so first one
by doing a couple things so first one was around
was around [Music]
[Music]
refreshing the the cap to reflect as much as possible where we left it
as much as possible where we left it where it left things off in the on the
where it left things off in the on the mailing list
mailing list there's plenty of still of open
there's plenty of still of open questions
questions and yeah we're going to go over that
and yeah we're going to go over that I think the other thing was that we
I think the other thing was that we started a thread on this code on the
started a thread on this code on the channels
channels so
so yeah at this point it's more like yeah
yeah at this point it's more like yeah we need to go through
we need to go through and iterate on this before we can
and iterate on this before we can give more updates on on what's going to
give more updates on on what's going to be next on the on the feed front and
be next on the on the feed front and basically like the yeah what we're
basically like the yeah what we're realizing is that there are a lot of
realizing is that there are a lot of things that we didn't incorporate yet
things that we didn't incorporate yet like there are
like there are you know this was written before we had
you know this was written before we had for example the pre-flight
for example the pre-flight in the picture things like that so
in the picture things like that so yeah there will be a
yeah there will be a for sure a little more a few more
for sure a little more a few more changes that need to have to be done
changes that need to have to be done but that's kind of what we are with
but that's kind of what we are with this not everyone to kind of spend
this not everyone to kind of spend more time on this just like you know
more time on this just like you know I'm inviting people to
I'm inviting people to to kind of follow the conversations
to kind of follow the conversations and
and yeah
yeah talk about and maybe help on you know
talk about and maybe help on you know helping us making decisions on this one
helping us making decisions on this one do we maybe want to keep a free high
do we maybe want to keep a free high level overview of what is there and you
level overview of what is there and you know what are the open questions we are
know what are the open questions we are trying to solve a recent page let's
trying to solve a recent page let's spend more time on the archival
spend more time on the archival proposal
yeah I think that yeah like so I guess yeah good good point like the type of
yeah good good point like the type of things we are trying to
things we are trying to
big issues I would say that we need to
to to kind of converge on on the feed
to kind of converge on on the feed front is
front is on what type of experience we want to
on what type of experience we want to expose to contract developers when it
expose to contract developers when it comes to the different markets that that
comes to the different markets that that exist in the system
exist in the system so we have the different resource
so we have the different resource types we have a
types we have a Ledger space we have a compute so
Ledger space we have a compute so like when when transactions execute
like when when transactions execute we have a network bandwidth and NBS I
we have a network bandwidth and NBS I think in terms of C markets that's
think in terms of C markets that's Canada we have other things that are
Canada we have other things that are related more to external systems so like
related more to external systems so like when people for example
when people for example
produce metadata that then then gets consumed by systems like horizon or
consumed by systems like horizon or sort of an OPC or yeah like still are
sort of an OPC or yeah like still are expert in red like uses this kind of
expert in red like uses this kind of of a data stream so like making it that
of a data stream so like making it that people can just
people can just spam those other systems is is part of
spam those other systems is is part of the you know in school for for the the
the you know in school for for the the fee schedule
fee schedule and then what did I forget oh yeah
and then what did I forget oh yeah we have also archives what has
we have also archives what has basically answered
basically answered
mandatory right like published to those history archives
those history archives so making sure so that people don't use
so making sure so that people don't use that as they are alternative to
that as they are alternative to S3 or you know like
S3 or you know like other places that you know when people
other places that you know when people can store data if they want want to the
can store data if they want want to the difference here is that those history
difference here is that those history archives are
archives are
romantic analysis forever after so there are some constraints there
are some constraints there and yeah so like the type of problems
and yeah so like the type of problems around those this the the model
around those this the the model for fees is how do we make it that we
for fees is how do we make it that we can balance usability so right now you
can balance usability so right now you know people used to do the classic
know people used to do the classic system they have
system they have a very simple way to think about things
a very simple way to think about things basically you have a base fee for one
basically you have a base fee for one operation if your transaction contains
operation if your transaction contains more than one you just multiply and
more than one you just multiply and that's kind of your your base in a way
that's kind of your your base in a way to kind of think think about the you
to kind of think think about the you know in terms of fee and if you want to
know in terms of fee and if you want to get ahead of other transactions on the
get ahead of other transactions on the network for whatever reason
network for whatever reason it just increase your your feeling
it just increase your your feeling that's kind of it right
that's kind of it right
and in soroban like the
in soroban like the because of the competition between those
because of the competition between those different
different
resource types that are open-ended right in terms of
in terms of consumption and competition so
consumption and competition so yeah we're going to need
yeah we're going to need something a little bit better than that
something a little bit better than that I mean like they're they're like in
I mean like they're they're like in places like in
places like in you know Italian they have
you know Italian they have you know a version of what you can do
you know a version of what you can do do with these so this is a
do with these so this is a single fee for for everything
single fee for for everything there are like proposals to make it
there are like proposals to make it maybe okay it comes to
maybe okay it comes to
to different resource types but that's nothing yet in Italian it is implemented
nothing yet in Italian it is implemented in other on cases like polkadot I think
in other on cases like polkadot I think [Music]
[Music] but yeah that's why we are kind of
but yeah that's why we are kind of trying to get
trying to get something usable
okay
I think that's kind of what I wanted to talk about on the feed from just you
talk about on the feed from just you know heads up it's coming
know heads up it's coming let's see and yeah we have the next
let's see and yeah we have the next guarant that I think wanted to give us a
guarant that I think wanted to give us a little more updates on last time there
little more updates on last time there was like we started to talk about the
was like we started to talk about the archive
archive mechanism that allows to to save space
mechanism that allows to to save space on the on the Ledger
on the on the Ledger so that we can keep the network
so that we can keep the network as cheap as as possible
as cheap as as possible and I think there were a few
and I think there were a few interesting follow-up conversations that
interesting follow-up conversations that also happen after that in this Garden
also happen after that in this Garden of this goal so
of this goal so Aaron and give us maybe a
Aaron and give us maybe a little a few updates on what's going on
little a few updates on what's going on there
there yeah so I guess first I want to talk a
yeah so I guess first I want to talk a little or just have some time for
little or just have some time for questions about the interface that we
questions about the interface that we talked about last week and so kind of
talked about last week and so kind of just like a high level summary of what
just like a high level summary of what we went over last time is essentially
we went over last time is essentially all sort of on data has this rent fee
all sort of on data has this rent fee and this rent balance
and this rent balance and so every Ledger or periodically
and so every Ledger or periodically you have to pay rent for keeping an
you have to pay rent for keeping an entry live on The Ledger and then
entry live on The Ledger and then whenever an entry runs out of its rent
whenever an entry runs out of its rent balance it could still be in from The
balance it could still be in from The Ledger and then sent to the archive and
Ledger and then sent to the archive and so with that interface we've kind of
so with that interface we've kind of exposed three different classes of
exposed three different classes of storage these kind of three different
storage these kind of three different types of storage replace today what
types of storage replace today what is currently the storage layer which is
is currently the storage layer which is like end dot storage in your smart
like end dot storage in your smart contract code and so with these three
contract code and so with these three types of storage Ares we have a unique
types of storage Ares we have a unique storage which is there's only ever one
storage which is there's only ever one version of the entry that exists the
version of the entry that exists the entry either exists on the bucket list
entry either exists on the bucket list or there's a single version of that
or there's a single version of that entry on the archive but never both
entry on the archive but never both and this is useful for types of data
and this is useful for types of data that have security concerns such as
that have security concerns such as nonsense or certain types of
nonsense or certain types of authorization where there could be
authorization where there could be security risks and issues if you have
security risks and issues if you have multiple versions of that entry that
multiple versions of that entry that could be restored kind of the the use
could be restored kind of the the use case here is if you could think about
case here is if you could think about Implement a nonce where you didn't
Implement a nonce where you didn't have this unique storage guarantee you
have this unique storage guarantee you could find yourself where you have a
could find yourself where you have a version one of the nonce in the archive
version one of the nonce in the archive of like say value five and then version
of like say value five and then version two of the nonce and the archive with a
two of the nonce and the archive with a different value and then you can imagine
different value and then you can imagine how a malicious user could restore those
how a malicious user could restore those entries in such a way that your knots
entries in such a way that your knots values out of date and not the correct
values out of date and not the correct value that should be so that's unique
value that should be so that's unique data it's more expensive because you
data it's more expensive because you have to prove that something doesn't
have to prove that something doesn't exist in the archive whenever you create
exist in the archive whenever you create something new and so there's a little
something new and so there's a little bit of work that needs to be done so
bit of work that needs to be done so it's the most expensive data type but
it's the most expensive data type but it's reserved for like those security
it's reserved for like those security and high-risk sort of entries and then
and high-risk sort of entries and then after unique storage we have what's
after unique storage we have what's called recreatable storage which is a
called recreatable storage which is a similar in that recreable storage
similar in that recreable storage entries whenever you run out of rent
entries whenever you run out of rent balance also get sent to the archive the
balance also get sent to the archive the only difference is that recreatable
only difference is that recreatable storage might have different versions in
storage might have different versions in the archiver multiple different versions
the archiver multiple different versions exists at the same time the reason for
exists at the same time the reason for this is that whenever you create a
this is that whenever you create a recreatable storage entry you don't
recreatable storage entry you don't check the archive to see if something
check the archive to see if something already exists there and so say you have
already exists there and so say you have something like a balance that got
something like a balance that got archived and then you go to create a new
archived and then you go to create a new version of that after your old key got
version of that after your old key got archived in recreatable storage you
archived in recreatable storage you don't check the archive and so you just
don't check the archive and so you just create a new entry with the exact same
create a new entry with the exact same key and so you have this key collision
key and so you have this key collision and so that's it's a little cheaper
and so that's it's a little cheaper than unique storage because you don't
than unique storage because you don't have to check the archive and actually
have to check the archive and actually show that this entry is unique that
show that this entry is unique that could be multiple versions of it so it's
could be multiple versions of it so it's cheaper but it's not appropriate for
cheaper but it's not appropriate for security types such as like nonsense or
security types such as like nonsense or auth where you don't want multiple
auth where you don't want multiple versions and so that's unique storage
versions and so that's unique storage and recreatable storage both of which
and recreatable storage both of which can be archived and then the final type
can be archived and then the final type of storage is called temporary storage
of storage is called temporary storage and this are for short-lived entries and
and this are for short-lived entries and so whenever a temporary storage entry
so whenever a temporary storage entry runs out of rent it just gets deleted it
runs out of rent it just gets deleted it doesn't get sent to the archive and so
doesn't get sent to the archive and so temporary storage is an appropriate for
temporary storage is an appropriate for sensitive data that you want to keep
sensitive data that you want to keep around like user balances but can be
around like user balances but can be useful for data types that either don't
useful for data types that either don't need to live very often like a
need to live very often like a short-term authorization to let an
short-term authorization to let an address spend your funds for instance or
address spend your funds for instance or for data types that can be easily
for data types that can be easily recreated if they get deleted such as
recreated if they get deleted such as like a payment path or a payment Channel
like a payment path or a payment Channel or something like that
or something like that and so I think
and so I think now even I think first I just want to
now even I think first I just want to open up the floor for questions and to
open up the floor for questions and to talk about this kind of like a interface
talk about this kind of like a interface and in particular talk about this like
and in particular talk about this like three-tiered approach and having three
three-tiered approach and having three different classes of storage because I
different classes of storage because I know that there's a little controversial
know that there's a little controversial and it's definitely a little bit more
and it's definitely a little bit more complex on the current interface just
complex on the current interface just wondering if there are any questions
wondering if there are any questions that
I do I do have a question if if I can go for it
go for it
so this is in in my sense this is actually a very good design I like it
actually a very good design I like it excuse me I'm wondering in terms of
excuse me I'm wondering in terms of staging this work I I it's quite
staging this work I I it's quite complicated and involved in some some
complicated and involved in some some quantity of it is going to depend on
quantity of it is going to depend on
some pretty big components being built out in terms of the archivers
out in terms of the archivers which is fine and and I think we can
which is fine and and I think we can I think we can do some staging I'm
I think we can do some staging I'm I'm
I'm in the sense of you know deploying
in the sense of you know deploying versions of zoroban that have the
versions of zoroban that have the interface but but you know some of it is
interface but but you know some of it is just defined to do nothing at this point
just defined to do nothing at this point or that sort of thing
or that sort of thing
I'm a little bit concerned about the unique storage one because unique
unique storage one because unique right off the bat has to have these
right off the bat has to have these these exclusion proofs in order to do
these exclusion proofs in order to do any rights is that correct
any rights is that correct yes I think what we could do is we can
yes I think what we could do is we can still do a staging process right
still do a staging process right and so I think what this would
and so I think what this would probably look like in practice is
probably look like in practice is whenever we launch sort button we don't
whenever we launch sort button we don't have the archive built out and so kind
have the archive built out and so kind of the current plan for you know v0
of the current plan for you know v0 on launch is to have the interface set
on launch is to have the interface set so to expose the unique recreable and
so to expose the unique recreable and temporary storage entry types to the
temporary storage entry types to the user and then to charge rent
user and then to charge rent and so the the thing that won't be
and so the the thing that won't be there though is that whenever your rent
there though is that whenever your rent balance goes to zero you won't get
balance goes to zero you won't get delayed and you won't get sent to the
delayed and you won't get sent to the archive because the archive won't be
archive because the archive won't be built yet right and so I think for
built yet right and so I think for Unique data in particular what we
Unique data in particular what we probably just want to do is we can still
probably just want to do is we can still I think we still should launch unique
I think we still should launch unique data and recreable storage
data and recreable storage just so that contracts can have the
just so that contracts can have the correct Paradigm written at launch but
correct Paradigm written at launch but what we can do I think at the
what we can do I think at the implementation level is just the four
implementation level is just the four just special cases right so like before
just special cases right so like before we have these proofs we can just say
we have these proofs we can just say essentially like creating unique
essentially like creating unique entries does not require proof of
entries does not require proof of exclusion until we actually provide an
exclusion until we actually provide an interface for those proof of exclusions
interface for those proof of exclusions that's that's exactly the part I was I
that's that's exactly the part I was I was asking about is is do you think we
was asking about is is do you think we would just sort of make it an optional
would just sort of make it an optional field at first and then when we rev the
field at first and then when we rev the protocol the optional field has to have
protocol the optional field has to have a value in it and we'll Define what that
a value in it and we'll Define what that value is in the future well we could do
value is in the future well we could do that we're actually now that I'm
that we're actually now that I'm thinking about it what we could do is
thinking about it what we could do is just zero initialize through cache
just zero initialize through cache and say the root archive hash is null
and say the root archive hash is null and then proof of exclusion become
and then proof of exclusion become trivial right because if your hash is
trivial right because if your hash is null then you're guaranteed that it's
null then you're guaranteed that it's empty and so I actually think we can
empty and so I actually think we can provide proofs of exclusion on day Zero
provide proofs of exclusion on day Zero actually
actually if we just Define the the null hash
if we just Define the the null hash and so the proof will always be null but
and so the proof will always be null but that's about proof if your root hash is
that's about proof if your root hash is null okay the other thing I'm thinking
null okay the other thing I'm thinking is that
is that you want this you want to use uniques
you want this you want to use uniques for nonsense and it seems like we we
for nonsense and it seems like we we update nonsense quite a lot
update nonsense quite a lot
and so I'm a little bit concerned about sort of an expensive
sort of an expensive operation that involves constructing a
operation that involves constructing a proof of exclusion
proof of exclusion has to
has to adhere to every every nonce update
adhere to every every nonce update certainly I I wonder about the nonsense
certainly I I wonder about the nonsense that are maintained by the auth system
that are maintained by the auth system maybe Dima could speak to that I think
maybe Dima could speak to that I think the third yeah I can I'm sorry if you
the third yeah I can I'm sorry if you don't mind current so I think guaranteed
don't mind current so I think guaranteed is using non's example is well just
is using non's example is well just an example of why this problem
an example of why this problem matters for the built-in nonsense at
matters for the built-in nonsense at least we decided to move forward with
least we decided to move forward with a temporary knowns approach or nonsense
a temporary knowns approach or nonsense and signatures basically have some time
and signatures basically have some time boundaries and certain the temporary
boundaries and certain the temporary Ledger entries so they don't even run
Ledger entries so they don't even run again
again and I would say this should be a
and I would say this should be a preferred approach right like I
preferred approach right like I reiterated this several times in the
reiterated this several times in the discussions here on Discord that with
discussions here on Discord that with the existence of temporary storage it's
the existence of temporary storage it's a really good idea to try benefit from
a really good idea to try benefit from it and
it and try to design for it right like in this
try to design for it right like in this case of nonsense right we can have this
case of nonsense right we can have this we need to bump it multiple times and
we need to bump it multiple times and it's not super convenient and stuff and
it's not super convenient and stuff and I I think the main use case for The
I I think the main use case for The Unique storage is really some admin data
Unique storage is really some admin data like you really don't want your admin
like you really don't want your admin entry to be taken over by someone just
entry to be taken over by someone just because it has expired right you have a
because it has expired right you have a token contract that you have insured
token contract that you have insured once a year ago and you have never
once a year ago and you have never touched it but you don't want to wake
touched it but you don't want to wake after a year the rent has expired you
after a year the rent has expired you don't really want someone else to just
don't really want someone else to just re-initialize it because the entry has
re-initialize it because the entry has expired so I feel like this is the main
expired so I feel like this is the main use case and this is a really pretty
use case and this is a really pretty cold entries if you think about it right
cold entries if you think about it right so yeah I think thinking about this a
so yeah I think thinking about this a bit I I I sort of retract my concern
bit I I I sort of retract my concern because I think you're right that if if
because I think you're right that if if the system has a well-defined notion of
the system has a well-defined notion of temporary storage with with time limits
temporary storage with with time limits on it then you just you just time bound
on it then you just you just time bound anything that is that is
anything that is that is you you propagate those time bounds to
you you propagate those time bounds to the things that use that storage such
the things that use that storage such that they they would they would become
that they they would they would become invalid at the same moment so I I can
invalid at the same moment so I I can see that being quite quite a viable
see that being quite quite a viable approach I like that that's good thank
approach I like that that's good thank you I also once make one
you I also once make one additional clarification I think in your
additional clarification I think in your original question you said oh do you
original question you said oh do you have to like provide a proof of
have to like provide a proof of exclusion every time you update it and
exclusion every time you update it and that's not true you only have to
that's not true you only have to provide the proof at creation time
provide the proof at creation time and then of course you have to
and then of course you have to provide proofs if you run out of rent
provide proofs if you run out of rent and then get sent to the archive but
and then get sent to the archive but once it's actually live on the bucket
once it's actually live on the bucket list then it says just as if you're
list then it says just as if you're modifying any other entry the proofs
modifying any other entry the proofs only apply if it's not on the bucket
only apply if it's not on the bucket list or if you're creating something for
list or if you're creating something for the first time and so if it's like
the first time and so if it's like again this is just an example but like
again this is just an example but like if it's a nonsense that's regularly used
if it's a nonsense that's regularly used then it wouldn't matter it would be
then it wouldn't matter it would be very cheap and efficient because it
very cheap and efficient because it would never get to the archive okay
would never get to the archive okay and oh I have one other very minor
and oh I have one other very minor question and this is more of a design
question and this is more of a design like time to hit the thesaurus we
like time to hit the thesaurus we already have something in a system
already have something in a system called an archive I I just feel like
called an archive I I just feel like we gotta use a different word for this
we gotta use a different word for this because it's just gonna it's just gonna
because it's just gonna it's just gonna follow up a lot of things that are
follow up a lot of things that are already referred our guys yeah maybe
already referred our guys yeah maybe like deep State source and like the yeah
like deep State source and like the yeah I don't know what you're gonna call it
I don't know what you're gonna call it but maybe maybe not start with deep
but maybe maybe not start with deep state that might be a tough
a graveyard yeah cool so I guess any other questions
cool so I guess any other questions about specifically the recreatable
about specifically the recreatable temporary and then unique storage
temporary and then unique storage interface before you move on
interface before you move on yes I'd like to ask
yes I'd like to ask why
why like is there any reason why you
like is there any reason why you don't use something like a bloom filter
don't use something like a bloom filter to
to to check whether the entry already
to check whether the entry already exists in the arch Avenue because
exists in the arch Avenue because given given the notion that we have a
given given the notion that we have a bloom filter of all entries in the
bloom filter of all entries in the archive we can probably
archive we can probably avoid having multiple versions of
avoid having multiple versions of archived entries and I think having only
archived entries and I think having only one version in the archive and
one version in the archive and preventing users to recreate
preventing users to recreate some entries that already exist in the
some entries that already exist in the archive
archive makes a lot of sense easier
makes a lot of sense easier yeah so we definitely investigated this
yeah so we definitely investigated this a lot and we tried to find a way if
a lot and we tried to find a way if there is a way for validators to store
there is a way for validators to store keys or to at least have some knowledge
keys or to at least have some knowledge of what's in the archive I think there's
of what's in the archive I think there's a couple issues there so first the
a couple issues there so first the goal of the archival state is to bound
goal of the archival state is to bound the amount of storage that values need
the amount of storage that values need to store and so if they need to store a
to store and so if they need to store a key even though that's you know less
key even though that's you know less than storing the entire data entry
than storing the entire data entry that's still an unbounded storage so
that's still an unbounded storage so that's issue number one but I think in
that's issue number one but I think in particular
particular you'd have to have a set of keys that
you'd have to have a set of keys that grows unbounded and that's not a great
grows unbounded and that's not a great solution because especially for sorbonne
solution because especially for sorbonne data types there's a lot of instances
data types there's a lot of instances where the key is actually as big or
where the key is actually as big or larger than the value because if you can
larger than the value because if you can think like the keys are 32 bytes
think like the keys are 32 bytes and I'm not you know super in depth
and I'm not you know super in depth at the current sort of implementation so
at the current sort of implementation so correct me if I'm wrong my understanding
correct me if I'm wrong my understanding is keys are 32 bytes but the value for
is keys are 32 bytes but the value for instance could be something as small as
instance could be something as small as I can that's only like four bytes or
I can that's only like four bytes or something like that and so I think
something like that and so I think you're not getting as good cost savings
you're not getting as good cost savings as you think if you just store the keys
as you think if you just store the keys business set not to your Bloom filter
business set not to your Bloom filter question or if there's a way to store
question or if there's a way to store the keys in a more efficient manner the
the keys in a more efficient manner the issue with Bloom filters in particular
issue with Bloom filters in particular is that they don't it's very difficult
is that they don't it's very difficult to resize the bloom filter and so if you
to resize the bloom filter and so if you say I have Unbound State and say okay
say I have Unbound State and say okay we're going to pick a bloom filter
we're going to pick a bloom filter that's one gigabyte large
that's one gigabyte large but in 10 years you need a larger
but in 10 years you need a larger Bloom filter because you're getting a
Bloom filter because you're getting a lot of collisions and stuff it's
lot of collisions and stuff it's impossible to just resize that bloom
impossible to just resize that bloom filter without having all the values
filter without having all the values because whenever you change the size of
because whenever you change the size of the bloom filter you have to rehash
the bloom filter you have to rehash everything that you've added to the
everything that you've added to the bloom filter which would not be possible
bloom filter which would not be possible for the validators because they've
for the validators because they've thrown all those values away and so
thrown all those values away and so essentially to resize your Bloom filter
essentially to resize your Bloom filter have to replay history from the
have to replay history from the beginning of time in order to resurface
beginning of time in order to resurface all the values that need to be in that
all the values that need to be in that blend filter and additionally there's
blend filter and additionally there's still issues with Bloom filters because
still issues with Bloom filters because they're probabilistic in nature and so
they're probabilistic in nature and so you would still have key collisions
you would still have key collisions sometimes or I guess
sometimes or I guess or not Keyhole rather because they
or not Keyhole rather because they only return
only return they don't return false Nexus I don't
they don't return false Nexus I don't think but then there'd be certain keys
think but then there'd be certain keys that just based on the probabilistic
that just based on the probabilistic nature of the bloom filter the
nature of the bloom filter the validators would think they're in the
validators would think they're in the archive even though they weren't in the
archive even though they weren't in the archive and so that would also be an
archive and so that would also be an issue where just based on whatever
issue where just based on whatever your hash function is there'd be certain
your hash function is there'd be certain keys that would essentially be
keys that would essentially be impossible to create because the balloon
impossible to create because the balloon filter thinks they already exist when
filter thinks they already exist when they really don't
they really don't so that answers your question about
so that answers your question about the the bloom filter issue in particular
the the bloom filter issue in particular the issue in general as well
I'm not entirely sure that the resizing issue is such a
the resizing issue is such a huge problem because you have an
huge problem because you have an archive where you have all the keys
archive where you have all the keys so once in a let's say 10 years it's
so once in a let's say 10 years it's possible to organize a resizing using
possible to organize a resizing using the archives as a source of all the
the archives as a source of all the existing keys
existing keys and to make like a maintenance for all
and to make like a maintenance for all the validators
the validators as for the size of the bloom filter for
as for the size of the bloom filter for example I just checked and one billion
example I just checked and one billion entries
entries with a reasonable
with a reasonable
false positives like
Point 0.1 percent
0.1 percent probability of false negatives takes
probability of false negatives takes about two and a half gigabytes so it's
about two and a half gigabytes so it's not the clutch and it will be enough for
not the clutch and it will be enough for the first billion entries
the first billion entries I think it's a reasonable trade-off for
I think it's a reasonable trade-off for to avoid
to avoid some other complexities as for the false
some other complexities as for the false positives case I think since you have
positives case I think since you have the vehicle tree or some other structure
the vehicle tree or some other structure if it's not set and so on yet then you
if it's not set and so on yet then you can probably check whether their hive
can probably check whether their hive this is archive contains the given K
this is archive contains the given K give given key if it's
give given key if it's let's say it can be a resurrected or
let's say it can be a resurrected or something like this maybe I'm missing
something like this maybe I'm missing something because I haven't think about
something because I haven't think about this
this for quite a long time but
do you still think that using some Bloom filters other
using some Bloom filters other probabilistic structures won't help to
probabilistic structures won't help to prevent collisions of entries in
prevent collisions of entries in archives like maybe there is some other
archives like maybe there is some other option
option because yeah this point looks like one
because yeah this point looks like one of the most controversial things about
of the most controversial things about the archives to me
the archives to me yeah this is a an interesting idea
yeah this is a an interesting idea actually I think you mentioned that
actually I think you mentioned that perhaps use the bloom filter
perhaps use the bloom filter as like a almost a caching layer for
as like a almost a caching layer for efficiency and then
efficiency and then using the proofs as kind of like a
using the proofs as kind of like a back end in case you get a false
back end in case you get a false positive I'm still not 100 sure if the
positive I'm still not 100 sure if the false positive case can be avoided right
false positive case can be avoided right because say like from this would
because say like from this would be very frustrating from a user
be very frustrating from a user standpoint say I have a key
standpoint say I have a key or like there's some like
or like there's some like deterministic way to like Define cues
deterministic way to like Define cues right so like I give my address
right so like I give my address and then like the address is input
and then like the address is input that generates
that generates the keys for entries associated with
the keys for entries associated with my account right like in a token
my account right like in a token contract
contract if one of those keys is a false positive
if one of those keys is a false positive then you just won't be able to create
then you just won't be able to create any entries based on your
any entries based on your your the invoker address right and so I
your the invoker address right and so I don't know if there's a way if you get a
don't know if there's a way if you get a false positive to somehow track the
false positive to somehow track the archive and say oh actually that wasn't
archive and say oh actually that wasn't a false positive it really is it really
a false positive it really is it really doesn't exist I promise
doesn't exist I promise and so I'm not sure
and so I'm not sure if there is a way to get around that
if there is a way to get around that case because I think like even if you
case because I think like even if you say like a reasonable false positive
say like a reasonable false positive rate like a 0.1 percent that still means
rate like a 0.1 percent that still means that one out of I think a thousand Keys
that one out of I think a thousand Keys or maybe a ten thousand keys I might
or maybe a ten thousand keys I might be off by zero or something there but
be off by zero or something there but essentially like one of the Thousand
essentially like one of the Thousand Keys
Keys you'll think it's in the archive when
you'll think it's in the archive when it really isn't which means that you are
it really isn't which means that you are not allowed to create one of the
not allowed to create one of the thousand one out of a thousand Keys
thousand one out of a thousand Keys which I feel like could be a really
which I feel like could be a really significant issue from the user
significant issue from the user interface perspective
do you think that the time of checking the existence of the key
checking the existence of the key over the Merkel tree or the miracle
over the Merkel tree or the miracle trios or the structure you plan to use
trios or the structure you plan to use for archive proofs it's like
for archive proofs it's like
a really huge time like seconds minutes or even more because if it's
or even more because if it's relatively small then
relatively small then checking
checking checking the existence only for
checking the existence only for conflicting entries and you will be
conflicting entries and you will be checking computer and entries only when
checking computer and entries only when someone tries to create already existing
someone tries to create already existing entry which
entry which actually I shouldn't be as
as often operation so like what are the time requirements for
what are the time requirements for checking against the try
checking against the try also I think one clarification
also I think one clarification here is that you can't just track
here is that you can't just track against the archive directly because the
against the archive directly because the archivers don't participate in consensus
archivers don't participate in consensus and are not validators they are off
and are not validators they are off chain right and so you can't just like
chain right and so you can't just like search through the tree brute force and
search through the tree brute force and trust that the contents are correct so
trust that the contents are correct so there has to be some way for the
there has to be some way for the archivers to give a proof to validators
archivers to give a proof to validators that the validators can then validate
that the validators can then validate themselves and so I think that's why
themselves and so I think that's why part of the reason we're using this try
part of the reason we're using this try model where we can get both proofs of
model where we can get both proofs of explosion pros of inclusion because I
explosion pros of inclusion because I think the difference between this
think the difference between this case and the Ubuntu case is that in the
case and the Ubuntu case is that in the Ubuntu case you can trust the the
Ubuntu case you can trust the the archive in our case we can't trust the
archive in our case we can't trust the archive we have to have some proof via
archive we have to have some proof via like a hash or something and so
like a hash or something and so I'm still I think I think it could be
I'm still I think I think it could be interesting this Bloom filter approach
interesting this Bloom filter approach if we can
if we can do the bloom filter
do the bloom filter and then if there's a collision maybe
and then if there's a collision maybe say even though there's a collision
say even though there's a collision in the bloom filter I'm going to go and
in the bloom filter I'm going to go and get a proof of exclusion
get a proof of exclusion and that would perhaps make it more
and that would perhaps make it more efficient and mean that in most cases
efficient and mean that in most cases you can get away with creating entries
you can get away with creating entries without a perfect exclusion
without a perfect exclusion
but I'm still not sure what that would look like I guess maybe what we could do
look like I guess maybe what we could do is you create your entry you check the
is you create your entry you check the bloom filter and then if you get an
bloom filter and then if you get an error on the bloom filter then you go
error on the bloom filter then you go try to get proof of exclusion and if
try to get proof of exclusion and if there's a valid proof of exclusion on
there's a valid proof of exclusion on chain that can override the bloom filter
chain that can override the bloom filter that might be an interesting
that might be an interesting optimization
optimization but
but I guess that's second point
I guess that's second point for explanation I don't want to steal
for explanation I don't want to steal the time it's definitely
like I I need to make more research on this and probably we should get back
on this and probably we should get back on this in that sales matter to to
on this in that sales matter to to instill the time
instill the time on this question here thanks for the
on this question here thanks for the explanation yeah I think that's a I
explanation yeah I think that's a I think it's definitely an interesting
think it's definitely an interesting idea that's definitely worth pursuing
idea that's definitely worth pursuing I guess one question I would ask is
I guess one question I would ask is under this proposal of the bloom filter
under this proposal of the bloom filter and whatnot this would make all data
and whatnot this would make all data unique data and so I'm wondering if
unique data and so I'm wondering if there are use cases where a user might
there are use cases where a user might actually want data to be recreatable
actually want data to be recreatable so thinking of the balanced use case I'm
so thinking of the balanced use case I'm thinking like is there ever a scenario
thinking like is there ever a scenario where it's actually an advantage to have
where it's actually an advantage to have multiple different versions
multiple different versions as opposed to only having this strict
as opposed to only having this strict one unique key
one unique key per archive per bucket list so I'm
per archive per bucket list so I'm thinking like for instance in the
thinking like for instance in the case of balances where the multiple
case of balances where the multiple different versions of the balance can
different versions of the balance can just be summed together
just be summed together is that a Advantage
is that a Advantage and is there like a do we still want
and is there like a do we still want to expose a repradable storage interface
to expose a repradable storage interface so you can be even faster and I guess
so you can be even faster and I guess like not have to do this like Bloom
like not have to do this like Bloom filter check not because of exclusion
filter check not because of exclusion all that sort of stuff or is like a
all that sort of stuff or is like a strict guarantee one key no collisions
strict guarantee one key no collisions powerful and that we shouldn't expose
powerful and that we shouldn't expose this interface at all
to tell the truth from my experience there is probably a known cases when
there is probably a known cases when you need several versions of the same
you need several versions of the same major entry
major entry in most cases it's even a destructive
in most cases it's even a destructive problem right because
problem right because creating an account or something else
creating an account or something else may
may [Music]
[Music] be a huge problem
be a huge problem I I I'd say that the
I I I'd say that the use case for
use case for like optional recreating
like optional recreating or maintaining several versions of the
or maintaining several versions of the same Ledger entry is a rather
and I haven't seen any use cases for this
seen any use cases for this and just one question that basically
and just one question that basically from the contract
from the contract to host interface tend to point like
to host interface tend to point like there is no version in any Video Edit to
there is no version in any Video Edit to kind of work around some issues in the
kind of work around some issues in the current approach but in general the
current approach but in general the interfaces that like you put something
interfaces that like you put something into storage and it will stay there
into storage and it will stay there quote unquote forever or you know you
quote unquote forever or you know you put it into Temp Storage then it will
put it into Temp Storage then it will be removed after a certain time period
be removed after a certain time period but you know like even from the period
but you know like even from the period is interface standpoint seriously no
is interface standpoint seriously no case for this multiple entry versions
case for this multiple entry versions and I think the main reason they are
and I think the main reason they are thinking of hiding it is just to kind of
thinking of hiding it is just to kind of save some time and cost just to be able
save some time and cost just to be able to quickly create entries without proof
to quickly create entries without proof of Proof Set exclusion but it's more
of Proof Set exclusion but it's more like an implementation detail that
like an implementation detail that unfortunately the contract writers would
unfortunately the contract writers would need to worry about in some cases versus
need to worry about in some cases versus like you know something is there things
like you know something is there things that can be used as a feature or the
that can be used as a feature or the contractor correct like if you need any
contractor correct like if you need any sort of person you can build it yourself
sort of person you can build it yourself using just or as key so what not so I'm
using just or as key so what not so I'm pretty sure there is no legitimate case
pretty sure there is no legitimate case for recreatable storage Beyond it like
for recreatable storage Beyond it like or requirements to the scalability
or requirements to the scalability
yeah yeah like maybe I can add that the reason
the reason right now the the reason we are looking
right now the the reason we are looking at this recruitable storage
at this recruitable storage is
is that we have token balances that are
that we have token balances that are interestingly
interestingly one of the kind of primary use
one of the kind of primary use cases for fast at all right and
cases for fast at all right and if we don't have recreatable
if we don't have recreatable storage we basically have either
storage we basically have either Temporaries right entries which for
Temporaries right entries which for balance is a no-go
balance is a no-go or going with those unique entries
or going with those unique entries and for that you need troops
and for that you need troops to create the balance so the cost of
to create the balance so the cost of an overhead of
an overhead of just kind of setting up your wallet
just kind of setting up your wallet becomes
becomes you know quite quite big for any new
you know quite quite big for any new token that's kind of the the problem
token that's kind of the the problem here is that
here is that I think the overhead of proofs is
I think the overhead of proofs is probably acceptable the first time you
probably acceptable the first time you kind of create your own wallet on your
kind of create your own wallet on your on the network
on the network but anytime you add a balance for any
but anytime you add a balance for any token
token it seems
it seems that having this overhead is kind of
that having this overhead is kind of too much
too much but yeah maybe we that's kind of part
but yeah maybe we that's kind of part of this discussion right to see you know
of this discussion right to see you know are we wrong here
are we wrong here yeah so I guess the the trade-off and
yeah so I guess the the trade-off and with the bloom filter approach where
with the bloom filter approach where you know and let's just put aside like
you know and let's just put aside like the resizing and migration issues for
the resizing and migration issues for now but the bloom filter approach all
now but the bloom filter approach all data is unique
data is unique but the false positive rate is the
but the false positive rate is the percentage of the time that you will
percentage of the time that you will need to provide a proof of exclusion for
need to provide a proof of exclusion for creating new entry and so let's just I
creating new entry and so let's just I guess the trade-off is everything is
guess the trade-off is everything is unique and the interface is easier but
unique and the interface is easier but one out of a thousand Creations are very
one out of a thousand Creations are very slow and require process of create
slow and require process of create precept explosion whereas if we have
precept explosion whereas if we have unique data and recreatable data then
unique data and recreatable data then the unique data is guaranteed to always
the unique data is guaranteed to always be slow but the recreatable data is
be slow but the recreatable data is guaranteed to always be fast and so I
guaranteed to always be fast and so I guess the trade-off is do we want
guess the trade-off is do we want all data to be fast most of the time
all data to be fast most of the time or all data creation to be fast most of
or all data creation to be fast most of the time and sometimes to be really slow
the time and sometimes to be really slow for the easier user interface or have a
for the easier user interface or have a more complex user interface where one
more complex user interface where one type of data is always slow to create
type of data is always slow to create and one type of data is guaranteed
and one type of data is guaranteed always fast to create I guess that's the
always fast to create I guess that's the the fundamental trade-off at least in my
the fundamental trade-off at least in my mind
and that sounds about right like the thing about the blue tilt the other is
thing about the blue tilt the other is that if in the context of like a balance
that if in the context of like a balance right
right the ID the the key right of that balance
the ID the the key right of that balance is actually deterministic
is actually deterministic so as it's deterministic it becomes kind
so as it's deterministic it becomes kind of attackable
of attackable unless we can come up with like a
unless we can come up with like a cryptographic you know Broomfield of
cryptographic you know Broomfield of sorts it's it's very easy to
sorts it's it's very easy to basically
basically you know cause certain keys to be to
you know cause certain keys to be to have complex in the boom filter and then
have complex in the boom filter and then you're kind of back to
you're kind of back to that you know even though it's one in a
that you know even though it's one in a thousand you know if you're the one that
thousand you know if you're the one that is always hit by the
is always hit by the by the one it kind of sucks
by the one it kind of sucks what if we utilize B tree index
what if we utilize B tree index or some other index or like
or some other index or like database actually doing this
database actually doing this and besides that the index itself can
and besides that the index itself can reside on the disk and
reside on the disk and the Fast Cash can be implemented
the Fast Cash can be implemented using the bloom filter and the actual
using the bloom filter and the actual track will be carried over the index for
track will be carried over the index for example B3 index
database handle this I mean the issue with an index is we're
I mean the issue with an index is we're getting to that issue where if we have
getting to that issue where if we have any deterministic index like that we
any deterministic index like that we need to store the keys right
need to store the keys right and then we have that same issue of
and then we have that same issue of unbalanced State growth and especially
unbalanced State growth and especially restore upon data where the keys can
restore upon data where the keys can sometimes be significantly larger to the
sometimes be significantly larger to the value so
value so I think any like deterministic data
I think any like deterministic data structure we can't get back into that
structure we can't get back into that issue of we have unbalanced State versus
issue of we have unbalanced State versus defeats the purpose of the archive in
defeats the purpose of the archive in the first place
the first place yeah I I just want to remind way
yeah I I just want to remind way basically we still need to maintain
basically we still need to maintain consensus and we cannot just like
consensus and we cannot just like randomly update boom shooter for example
randomly update boom shooter for example right it has to be a part of consensus
right it has to be a part of consensus so it would need to come up with some
so it would need to come up with some way to Hash it quickly and add it to the
way to Hash it quickly and add it to the CP values and make sure it's archived
CP values and make sure it's archived properly you know
properly you know significant amount of work and
significant amount of work and I mean
I mean you could say that the keys are stroke
you could say that the keys are stroke in The Ledger forever and then you build
in The Ledger forever and then you build some sort of index on them blockchain
some sort of index on them blockchain but then you know yeah it kind of no
but then you know yeah it kind of no longer fulfills the requirement of
longer fulfills the requirement of having
having limited Venture state cross which we
limited Venture state cross which we wanted to fulfill so it's kind of an
wanted to fulfill so it's kind of an issue and yeah that for what source like
issue and yeah that for what source like it was my first city as well like what
it was my first city as well like what if we just throw keys in The Ledger but
if we just throw keys in The Ledger but yeah that unfortunately kind of doesn't
yeah that unfortunately kind of doesn't scale as well
scale as well yeah so I think I think the Bloom
yeah so I think I think the Bloom filter with a proof of exclusion
filter with a proof of exclusion fallback for false positives it's an
fallback for false positives it's an interesting idea I think we probably
interesting idea I think we probably have some technical homework to do there
have some technical homework to do there so I think it's all right for
so I think it's all right for everyone to move on to the second
everyone to move on to the second topic
I'm not hearing any objection Celtic as yes so kind of slipping away from the
yes so kind of slipping away from the user interface now talking about how the
user interface now talking about how the archiver interface will be set up and so
archiver interface will be set up and so currently
currently there are kind of like two proposals
there are kind of like two proposals one where we have an archive
one where we have an archive interface that's a functions similar to
interface that's a functions similar to capture how Horizon functions now where
capture how Horizon functions now where you go to a specific archiver you have
you go to a specific archiver you have some URL endpoint and then you query
some URL endpoint and then you query that endpoint with the keys you want to
that endpoint with the keys you want to be archived
be archived and so this is like a a model similar
and so this is like a a model similar to what we have today with Verizon some
to what we have today with Verizon some of the pros there's pros and cons
of the pros there's pros and cons what are the cons that you have to have
what are the cons that you have to have like a personal relationship or at least
like a personal relationship or at least know an archiver to go to
know an archiver to go to and then it's not super clear how we
and then it's not super clear how we could incentivize or monetize this sort
could incentivize or monetize this sort of interface perhaps you would have to
of interface perhaps you would have to like pay a monthly subscription to the
like pay a monthly subscription to the archive or perhaps you'd have some
archive or perhaps you'd have some relationship where you like pay your
relationship where you like pay your archive or per entry lookup or something
archive or per entry lookup or something like that but it's not super clear how
like that but it's not super clear how we incentivize people actually brought
we incentivize people actually brought in archivers in this setup so the second
in archivers in this setup so the second scenario is where we have kind of
scenario is where we have kind of what I'm referring to as the archive
what I'm referring to as the archive miners kind of stealing the minor
miners kind of stealing the minor terminology from Bitcoin
terminology from Bitcoin so essentially how this would work
so essentially how this would work is instead of acquiring an archiver
is instead of acquiring an archiver directly whenever you need a proof you
directly whenever you need a proof you submit a proof request
submit a proof request on chain now this could either be
on chain now this could either be implemented at the protocol level where
implemented at the protocol level where proof request is an operation or this
proof request is an operation or this might also be able to be implemented by
might also be able to be implemented by like a first party smart contract but
like a first party smart contract but that's not really important right now
that's not really important right now but essentially you would just submit an
but essentially you would just submit an operation that requests an archival
operation that requests an archival proof and then by submitting this
proof and then by submitting this operation you'd submit meta information
operation you'd submit meta information that archivers could then adjust and
that archivers could then adjust and that's how the archivers would know
that's how the archivers would know about the requests and as part of this
about the requests and as part of this operation you would say the key you want
operation you would say the key you want to be proven the type of proof select
to be proven the type of proof select proof of inclusion proof exclusion and
proof of inclusion proof exclusion and then also a reward and this reward would
then also a reward and this reward would be variable and you would be the
be variable and you would be the would be at the user's discretion as to
would be at the user's discretion as to what to set this reward to and then this
what to set this reward to and then this operation this request would go on chain
operation this request would go on chain and the metal would be a submit and so
and the metal would be a submit and so an archival within Injustice meta and
an archival within Injustice meta and then pick what
then pick what requests they want to service and so
requests they want to service and so they could reservice the request that
they could reservice the request that has the highest reward first
has the highest reward first and then they construct the proof
and then they construct the proof with the information that they store and
with the information that they store and then they submit the proof another
then they submit the proof another operation and then the proof itself
operation and then the proof itself becomes an entry on The Ledger and so
becomes an entry on The Ledger and so once that proof has been submitted and
once that proof has been submitted and validated and the proof is on Ledger
validated and the proof is on Ledger then the proof or the proof request is
then the proof or the proof request is deleted and the reward is given to
deleted and the reward is given to whoever submitted the correct archival
whoever submitted the correct archival proof first and so this is I think a
proof first and so this is I think a better interface because it has a
better interface because it has a clearly defined incentive structure and
clearly defined incentive structure and also doesn't require any personal
also doesn't require any personal relationships with an archiver and so
relationships with an archiver and so you don't have to have a URL that you
you don't have to have a URL that you talk to or you don't have to have a
talk to or you don't have to have a relationship with some company that you
relationship with some company that you pay monthly to pay some subscription fee
pay monthly to pay some subscription fee in order to access the archive it also
in order to access the archive it also allows archivers to freely
allows archivers to freely enter and exit the network as they
enter and exit the network as they please and also by having a variable
please and also by having a variable reward that the user can set you can
reward that the user can set you can also have essentially like a built-in
also have essentially like a built-in supply and demand Dynamics where that
supply and demand Dynamics where that price fluctuates over time depending on
price fluctuates over time depending on how many people want to restore
how many people want to restore archived entries and how many archivers
archived entries and how many archivers want to service archives and so I guess
want to service archives and so I guess generally speaking what are your
generally speaking what are your thoughts on the two approaches and
thoughts on the two approaches and kind of the leading approach being this
kind of the leading approach being this I'm submitting proof request to the
I'm submitting proof request to the chain and then having archivers read
chain and then having archivers read the chain and then submit the proofs
the chain and then submit the proofs how do we feel about that
have you ever speak let's see so like the the thing I'm
let's see so like the the thing I'm thinking of right in terms of like
thinking of right in terms of like meaningful viable product I'm
meaningful viable product I'm thinking the having a way to talk
thinking the having a way to talk directly to archives is is kind of a
directly to archives is is kind of a foolproof
foolproof
the the approach where you use the on-chain state
on-chain state I think I mean it's I think there
I think I mean it's I think there is like good potential there I think
is like good potential there I think it's it's going to be fairly tricky
it's it's going to be fairly tricky to get this right the reason being
to get this right the reason being that basically
that basically
your so you have you're not creating like intrinsic
you're not creating like intrinsic value right to certain transactions
value right to certain transactions that are being published on the
that are being published on the overlay and therefore a
overlay and therefore a [Music]
[Music] like a board of source right can can
like a board of source right can can look at this overlay traffic and
look at this overlay traffic and don't run take the data right that is
don't run take the data right that is the primage right the proof
the primage right the proof and from the the archival that
and from the the archival that actually did the work
actually did the work and benefit from the academy so I think
and benefit from the academy so I think there is like an interesting problem
there is like an interesting problem there to solve
there to solve in terms of like how can you safely
in terms of like how can you safely disclose the the proof to the
disclose the the proof to the network without being from
sinus right interesting some entities that
interesting some entities that can be signing it
can be signing it refining
refining well the issue that was signing is how
well the issue that was signing is how can like like the mental not just
can like like the mental not just like take your proof and then sign with
like take your proof and then sign with its own address
its own address and then submit as if it was the
and then submit as if it was the originator
yeah that's fair I'm not sure
and I think there might be ways to do it right like it's a it's a
maybe what you you you you it's like a multiple multi-step thing right where
multiple multi-step thing right where you you because you were first to
you you because you were first to disclose let's say the harsh of the
disclose let's say the harsh of the proof
proof before you actually disclosure proof
before you actually disclosure proof then you're the one you know if it's a
then you're the one you know if it's a contract that's doing the that work
contract that's doing the that work then we can basically give the
then we can basically give the the first you know first one
the first you know first one the benefit I mean at the same time like
the benefit I mean at the same time like a
a yeah maybe a bot can I mean it becomes
yeah maybe a bot can I mean it becomes kind of a a cat and you know a nice game
kind of a a cat and you know a nice game right like where you
right like where you yeah
yeah how to do this safely
how to do this safely yeah I think in the front room
yeah I think in the front room like because you know yours are like
like because you know yours are like super nice people that maybe on I
super nice people that maybe on I mean not trying to game the system
yeah I I thought like the the front running I did was just to like if
running I did was just to like if they're the same proofs multiple the
they're the same proofs multiple the same proofs in the same block just or
same proofs in the same block just or randomly pick one but I didn't think
randomly pick one but I didn't think about this proof stealing case
about this proof stealing case in front running by stealing proof so
in front running by stealing proof so this is definitely an interesting issue
this is definitely an interesting issue to think about but I still I still like
to think about but I still I still like the model where you don't have to have a
the model where you don't have to have a relationship with the archive for a
relationship with the archive for a couple of reasons so first
couple of reasons so first it's likely that especially you know
it's likely that especially you know if the archive systems run for a long
if the archive systems run for a long time archivers will not store the entire
time archivers will not store the entire archive I think it's a good idea to let
archive I think it's a good idea to let the archive pick and choose how much or
the archive pick and choose how much or how little of his or of the archive
how little of his or of the archive history they want to store and so I can
history they want to store and so I can see an archiver that only stores the
see an archiver that only stores the last five years one that stores the last
last five years one that stores the last 10 years and then one that's like a more
10 years and then one that's like a more expensive on the stores like the last 50
expensive on the stores like the last 50 years for instance I think if you have
years for instance I think if you have to like individually query an archiver
to like individually query an archiver you have this weird interface where for
you have this weird interface where for things that are three years old you can
things that are three years old you can maybe query a cheap archiver and then
maybe query a cheap archiver and then for things that are older you have to
for things that are older you have to change your URL or something like that
change your URL or something like that to Target like a different archive that
to Target like a different archive that has more history state or something like
has more history state or something like that and so I think there's still some
that and so I think there's still some some interface issues with having to
some interface issues with having to talk to the archiver directly but at
talk to the archiver directly but at least on the top of my head I don't have
least on the top of my head I don't have a great solution to the stealing proofs
a great solution to the stealing proofs thing
thing I think that's the challenges
yeah I was going to say like the the I think it's it's a we should definitely
I think it's it's a we should definitely be looking into those mechanisms that
be looking into those mechanisms that are like a little more distributed right
are like a little more distributed right from a you know Discovery Point of View
from a you know Discovery Point of View
I think all it means is that we use
we use we we have the proper semantics on
we we have the proper semantics on network to allow for for doing this so
network to allow for for doing this so like I think for example like the thing
like I think for example like the thing where we have
where we have proofs that are usable independently of
proofs that are usable independently of using you know the entries
using you know the entries yeah I think this is like a a key
yeah I think this is like a a key property that we need to have right
property that we need to have right because I I know like one of the earlier
because I I know like one of the earlier drafts
drafts was requiring people to submit proofs
was requiring people to submit proofs in the same transaction that they
in the same transaction that they were going to use the you know the
were going to use the you know the actual and actually restore the entry
actual and actually restore the entry and obviously this this would not
and obviously this this would not work in you know would not enable the
work in you know would not enable the type of
type of of scenarios
yeah I definitely like having having the or the proofs themselves be Ledger
or the proofs themselves be Ledger entries
entries I just I think we just need to find the
I just I think we just need to find the the best way to
the best way to to make sure the system isn't getting it
to make sure the system isn't getting it or gained
yeah yeah there's a because there's not a clear solution because I mean you
a clear solution because I mean you could submit say like before you submit
could submit say like before you submit the proof If you submit the hash to say
the proof If you submit the hash to say hey I was here first and then submit the
hey I was here first and then submit the proof of the next Ledger but then you
proof of the next Ledger but then you could open yourself up to Dos attacks
could open yourself up to Dos attacks for a malicious user could just generate
for a malicious user could just generate a bunch of dummy proofs and then submit
a bunch of dummy proofs and then submit them for every archive request and then
them for every archive request and then archivers would not want to service
archivers would not want to service those requests because something's
those requests because something's already spoken for it and issues like
already spoken for it and issues like that so
that so so I think we need to think about but I
so I think we need to think about but I definitely like I think we definitely
definitely like I think we definitely should have the proofs on chain like
should have the proofs on chain like you mentioned
you mentioned and we should see if there's a way to
and we should see if there's a way to solve this issue in a way that makes
solve this issue in a way that makes sense
if you have a you know a few more minutes left was there like some
minutes left was there like some other
other topic that you wanted to cover as part
topic that you wanted to cover as part of of this yes I guess one other
of of this yes I guess one other question that's kind of that we don't
question that's kind of that we don't have a great solution for
have a great solution for and this is one that we need to
and this is one that we need to figure out here pretty soon because it's
figure out here pretty soon because it's required to launch for v0 is how to bump
required to launch for v0 is how to bump rent and so right now whenever you
rent and so right now whenever you create an entry
create an entry it's created and initializes rent
it's created and initializes rent balance to some amount but there doesn't
balance to some amount but there doesn't seem to be a great way in order to bump
seem to be a great way in order to bump rent and to actually increase that rent
rent and to actually increase that rent balance and so kind of the initial
balance and so kind of the initial thought was Hey whenever you access
thought was Hey whenever you access something increase the rent
something increase the rent and that's way that the things that
and that's way that the things that are accessed most commonly automatically
are accessed most commonly automatically have their rent increased and so if you
have their rent increased and so if you access something a lot it will most
access something a lot it will most likely be on the buy policy and we'll
likely be on the buy policy and we'll have to unarchive it now for read write
have to unarchive it now for read write items it's easy because you have to
items it's easy because you have to rewrite the entry anyway so you might as
rewrite the entry anyway so you might as well bump the rent however it's not
well bump the rent however it's not clear how to bump rent on read only
clear how to bump rent on read only items so for instance
items so for instance if you have auth
if you have auth say like an auth record that's almost
say like an auth record that's almost never changed but is read often
never changed but is read often
you would want to bump the rent on reads so that you wouldn't have to constantly
so that you wouldn't have to constantly unarchive it the issue is because the
unarchive it the issue is because the way the bucket list is structured
way the bucket list is structured there's no way to bump rent without
there's no way to bump rent without rewriting the entry because
rewriting the entry because essentially the way the bucket list
essentially the way the bucket list is structured entries and buckets are
is structured entries and buckets are immutable and so in order to update an
immutable and so in order to update an entry it's not like SQL you can just go
entry it's not like SQL you can just go to the entry and then change a value you
to the entry and then change a value you have to completely rewrite the entry and
have to completely rewrite the entry and so we wouldn't want to bump rent on
so we wouldn't want to bump rent on every read because then we're implicitly
every read because then we're implicitly at the systems level turning reads into
at the systems level turning reads into read writes which we don't want to do
read writes which we don't want to do and so I guess in the read write case
and so I guess in the read write case we obviously want to bump rent but I was
we obviously want to bump rent but I was wondering if there are any ideas as to
wondering if there are any ideas as to what to do for like read-only data and
what to do for like read-only data and how to handle rent in that regard
well simple way I've been thinking about is
about is well you just said with online but you
well you just said with online but you know I'm exposed just some contract
know I'm exposed just some contract function but that's free tried access to
function but that's free tried access to the entries that you want to bomb
the entries that you want to bomb and nothing else
and nothing else
that will basically you know to call just as any other
you know to call just as any other contract function to bounce around
contract function to bounce around but that maybe can be generalized to
but that maybe can be generalized to you know post functions that allows you
you know post functions that allows you action arbitrary entries without
action arbitrary entries without accessing them so that you know you
accessing them so that you know you don't need to
don't need to maintain any invariants in terms of like
maintain any invariants in terms of like only the contract can modify its own
only the contract can modify its own data I guess they can all agree that one
data I guess they can all agree that one pins or end is always positive right so
pins or end is always positive right so anyone can do that and then you know
anyone can do that and then you know just kind of cost functions it takes a
just kind of cost functions it takes a bunch of majorities catches them at
bunch of majorities catches them at print right
print right supposing pumpkins rent by whatever
supposing pumpkins rent by whatever mechanism they come up this
mechanism they come up this which again is not super pretty but
which again is not super pretty but that makes it possible to do the pump
that makes it possible to do the pump without touching the contract code and
without touching the contract code and increasing inside guys and so on so
increasing inside guys and so on so you know it's a basically a generic way
you know it's a basically a generic way to maintain your contracts I think it's
to maintain your contracts I think it's maybe viable
maybe viable yeah I think the host function could be
yeah I think the host function could be good I think the only issue with that is
good I think the only issue with that is key Discovery is still an issue
key Discovery is still an issue and then it might be difficult to
and then it might be difficult to determine what keys you need to bump
determine what keys you need to bump around for in the host function
around for in the host function but perhaps one another thing is we
but perhaps one another thing is we could
could expose a explicit rent bump
expose a explicit rent bump at like the storage interface
at like the storage interface and then also make the current rent
and then also make the current rent balance readable
balance readable in the smart contract so I could imagine
in the smart contract so I could imagine something like maybe a common
something like maybe a common Paradigm for read-only data would be
Paradigm for read-only data would be like if you have an off entry whenever
like if you have an off entry whenever you read it you say you also have a
you read it you say you also have a check to see if the rent balance has
check to see if the rent balance has fallen below some level and if so then
fallen below some level and if so then you call Rent bump on that value
you call Rent bump on that value so I guess or I don't know if that
so I guess or I don't know if that would be possible then because or none
would be possible then because or none of that would be possible and so then
of that would be possible and so then essentially
essentially there's a g path and an expensive
there's a g path and an expensive path and so if your rent is above the
path and so if your rent is above the value then pre-flight would put that
value then pre-flight would put that entry in the read-only data set but if
entry in the read-only data set but if your rent is below a value then
your rent is below a value then PreFlight would put it in the read write
PreFlight would put it in the read write set and bump the rent and so I think
set and bump the rent and so I think that might be also another possible
that might be also another possible solution for for often like read-only
solution for for often like read-only data I mean that's kind of possible but
data I mean that's kind of possible but doesn't solve it for everything like
doesn't solve it for everything like imagine again your token right and it
imagine again your token right and it has the you know an admin and let's say
has the you know an admin and let's say you don't mean this token much
you don't mean this token much so you don't touch the admin entry
so you don't touch the admin entry frequently and then it would still
frequently and then it would still expire right you you know the admin
expire right you you know the admin functions frequently enough so you know
functions frequently enough so you know for the important things you
for the important things you it sure needs some sort of manual
it sure needs some sort of manual tracking and you still need to
tracking and you still need to understand which entries need to be
understand which entries need to be updated they I'm sure we can avoid this
updated they I'm sure we can avoid this food just because you know some interest
food just because you know some interest may be rarely accessible well I think
may be rarely accessible well I think that's okay actually
that's okay actually because if you don't access admin
because if you don't access admin very much and whatever you access it you
very much and whatever you access it you need to restore your admin entry I think
need to restore your admin entry I think that's okay I think the case I'm talking
that's okay I think the case I'm talking about is if you have some really value
about is if you have some really value that you access a ton that still gets
that you access a ton that still gets archived all the time
archived all the time yeah but but my point is that you know
yeah but but my point is that you know you can still forget to call it so I
you can still forget to call it so I mean rely on automatic bumps is not
mean rely on automatic bumps is not going to always work
going to always work and another thing is that imagine
and another thing is that imagine you know
oh maybe it's not a super good example but I I've been just thinking about who
but I I've been just thinking about who who pays for the bump right it's always
who pays for the bump right it's always a source account who pays for the bumps
a source account who pays for the bumps and
and it would be a bit weird like if every
it would be a bit weird like if every once in a while
once in a while like some transaction to your contract
like some transaction to your contract suddenly becomes more expensive because
suddenly becomes more expensive because you need to bounce around but you may be
you need to bounce around but you may be bump into rent of some entries that has
bump into rent of some entries that has nothing to do with your account
nothing to do with your account specifically like for example let's say
specifically like for example let's say you have some found that stores some
you have some found that stores some sorry some contracted Source some State
sorry some contracted Source some State saying
it's like never going to change right and it's always free download
right and it's always free download and then there is no clear owner of the
and then there is no clear owner of the token paywrites they're not
token paywrites they're not
owned by any address or anything so what would happen is like every once in a
would happen is like every once in a while someone who trades with this
while someone who trades with this liquidity pool will need to pay for
liquidity pool will need to pay for their inbound I was a token payer record
their inbound I was a token payer record which is a little bit awkward right
which is a little bit awkward right because I I just want to trade why would
because I I just want to trade why would it charge me more and you know I then
it charge me more and you know I then draw all the incentives to kind of try
draw all the incentives to kind of try to gain this and
to gain this and president not submit transactions until
president not submit transactions until someone else has pumped you know I mean
someone else has pumped you know I mean it's definitely viable on paper but it
it's definitely viable on paper but it just leads to distribute situations for
just leads to distribute situations for you know you're in a bumping rent on the
you know you're in a bumping rent on the some interest
some interest you can respond to know about right I
you can respond to know about right I guess it also depends on the amount
guess it also depends on the amount because it's well enough and it probably
because it's well enough and it probably doesn't matter but if it's high enough
doesn't matter but if it's high enough then suddenly it becomes pretty annoying
then suddenly it becomes pretty annoying for the user who ended up paying it
yeah thank you I agree like it we probably need to think about those
probably need to think about those couple of angles like the
couple of angles like the people that want to kind of maintain
people that want to kind of maintain their their run balance on on those
their their run balance on on those like read-only type of items that and
like read-only type of items that and when I say people here could be a
when I say people here could be a contract that tries to do like like an
contract that tries to do like like an mm right that wants to kind of ensure
mm right that wants to kind of ensure that it keeps alive its own thing at the
that it keeps alive its own thing at the same time there are probably scenarios
same time there are probably scenarios where
where you want to kind of
you want to kind of do that from the outside in some way
do that from the outside in some way right because you don't want every
right because you don't want every contract
contract I mean yeah in the up cases where this
I mean yeah in the up cases where this is going to not work like if nobody is
is going to not work like if nobody is using it or and you need to revalue it
using it or and you need to revalue it or I don't know
or I don't know anyways we have time so
anyways we have time so thank you everybody let's continue
thank you everybody let's continue those conversations actually we should
those conversations actually we should probably create like explicit threads
probably create like explicit threads on the
on the you know on the dev Channel
you know on the dev Channel about those topics and then yeah
about those topics and then yeah we'll keep going
we'll keep going thank you again